BingeList was social networking app focused on film and tv show recommendations. The product design used social interactions and reviews from peers to drive its recommendation engine. BingeList was a San Francisco start-up lead by the founders of [Bleacher Report](http://bleacherreport.com/), and was eventually bought by Time Warner Media before it's commercial release.

I was directly involved in the product designs from the beginning. The designs developed from extensive user-research into the first and second iterations of the Minimum Viable Products (MVP). Since the team was all working remotely (I was in New Zealand) I had to establish a cohesive work-flow and toolbox of techniques to help me communicate the development of the designs effectively. All visuals, task-flows and interactions were based on the user-research that had been collated into a concise living document. The designs proceeded from research to wireframes, visual explorations, motions designs, the develop of clickable prototypes, detailed visual mockups and formatted assets for use with the development team. Limited user testing was done at various stages. Code for the motion designs was developed to ensure easy and accurate implementation. All these artifacts and process steps helped to coordinate management, product, design and development directions.

It is a rare opportunity to work on a new product design from the beginning and being able to own it. There were many facets of the BlingeList design that I still consider novel such as the rating system and the mode of social interactions. After all the design and development effort it's disappointing not seeing the service commercialised. Initial test market feedback was very positive. A big part of the project was developing a good design process. All design ideas could be traced back to the on-going research. The development team embraced the designs as a result - owning both the vision and the realisation. Getting other team members to embrace the design as their own is something I consider an important outcome in any design process so it was gratifying to see this happen.
