*This is the first part in a series looking into methods and principles often associated with the term 'UX' and how they are not exclusive to the realm of design. [Click here](#/thoughts/160926) to go to the previous part - Putting Qualitative Data to Work*

Understanding through language is an important aspect of design. Knowing what language to use; the medium it travels through; all of it must be considered. Like using a subject’s own language in an interview, adopting the correct language among third parties is crucial in achieving consensus in design. Stake-holders, collaborators and internal teams not directly involved with the design all have their own language. Using the right one ensures that all parties are on the same page when identifying problem, solutions and how everything fits together. Language is the lubricant that enables efficient practice. Models are one way of establishing a shared language.

Remember the demographic example I mentioned in a part earlier on in this series? The National Library’s focus on appealing to the interests of tweens and teenagers? Our research showed that behaviours in tweens could also be seen in other demographics. How do show a stake-holder that their perspective of the problem is a limited one? How do you implicitly teach them about task-based audience segments from scratch? Presenting our models using their own language was the solution we used.

Once the quotes from the interviews had been broken down into the core tasks, they needed to be organised into groups of similar or related tasks. One of the best tools I found to help with this type of organisation is a web app called Mural. Think of it as an online, shareable Post-it note board. It’s also a convenient tool that organises the tasks from your spreadsheet. Plus the small size of the virtual Post-It notes provide a good guide for knowing if your written task isn't succinct enough. Tasks shouldn't be long winded affairs. If the task's text is too small in Mural's digital notes, then it needs to be reworded. Colour coding with a key and 2D spatial manipulation of the notes helps to show what specific topics tasks relate to. Copying over tasks into Mural also provides a great opportunity to start grouping them together. Going through each task as you transfer them from spreadsheet to Mural means by the time you've copied everything over, each task should be in clumps of roughly defined groups. Some tasks may be so closely related that they really are just the same thing. Take this for example:

___

**Use personal stories to help digest information**

* Believes you understand facts through personal stories
* Believes personal stories provide better context for learning
* Engage more directly with content that has a personal connection
* Read things that I can personally relate to
* Feel I need a personal connection to care about the events I go to
* Become emotionally invested if I can relate to it through personal stories

___

It's easy to see here that personal perspectives and how they help people to relate to stories are the continuing theme throughout these tasks. The individual tasks might not be directly related, but at a higher concept level they are a defined mental space that needs to be considered. The more tasks are put into these groups,the more these higher level groups are related to other higher level groups. The higher the level, the more general the thinking; the individual tasks may be conceptually related but on a granular level are not the same. Eventually, as you go higher in conceptual task levels, you will get to the point where you can't group any further. This is called a mental space; a place shared by the minds of your audience:

<div class="gallery">
  <iron-image class="galleryItem" style="background-color: white" sizing="contain" preload fade src="/src/content/thoughts_items/161003/gallery/closeup-mental-model.png"></iron-image>
</div>

Mental spaces evolve naturally over time as you group tasks together to the point where you end up with this, the mental model of your audience:

<div class="gallery">
  <iron-image class="galleryItem" style="background-color: white" sizing="contain" preload fade src="/src/content/thoughts_items/161003/gallery/mural-mental-model.png"></iron-image>
</div>

Before a problem can be solved, the people who are most affected by it and why the problem exists needs to be understood. One must completely immerse themselves in the mind of those to be solved for. To understand their philosophies, to understand why they want the problem to be solved in the first place. To be able to empathise and identify their pain points before even starting to think of a solution. The mental model is the map of the minds of those people. Like a map, you can read the pathways of thoughts to reveal how and why someone will get to point B from point A. Mental models capture this information to inform future design decisions. To make the distance between those two points shorter and easier to travel. They are an invaluable tool to help point the designer in the right direction before even attempting to start their design journey.

Mental models are great reference tools that should be a core resource in all facets of the design process. One issue however is that not everyone is involved in the research side of the process or knows how to read a mental model. There needs to be a conscious effort to distill the many elements of the mental model so that it can be easily communicated across the many involved parties in a design project. Important discoveries made from the research side of the project need to be communicated with appropriate evidence of the point. Referential tools need to be created so that they are easily accessible so that they are complimentary to thinking rather than bogging it down. Design is a language and the design process is a conversation among team-members, stakeholders and users.

Below, I will go over some of the methods I've used to make communication between all involved parties seamless. I like to think of a design team as a brain. Each person is a neurone communicating between everyone else through multiple synapses. If communication is inefficient, it is unfocused and easily distracted. However, if everything is communicated in unison, the brain is focused and can solve the toughest problems quickly;

People understand things best in the context of what they know. Personas  are a great tool for communicating an array of complex behavioural patterns in a relatable way. The personas I use are called Behavioural Personas. They’re a little bit different from the conventional persona used across design. Behavioural Personas are fictional people created to convey and demonstrate the different aspects of the researched audience segment. They show not just behaviours, as the name implies, but philosophies, habits and specific language they might use. When research is put into the context of a persona, the data suddenly becomes relatable. One signal of a good persona, is people immediately identifying with one of them. They do this either by comparing their behaviour or that of someone they know with the personas. This is one of the many benefits of behavioural driven personas over the traditional demographically driven ones.

Demographics tell us that a senior citizen and a teenager are two completely different types of people with no relationship in their behaviour. Developing personas based on behavioural research however, shows that this is not always the case and a narrow minded way of looking at people. We had a similar finding in our research for the exhibition. The primary stakeholder wanted to make sure we considered young teenagers and school programs in the design of the exhibition. After conducting research, the behaviours among students and teenagers wan't so clear cut. Behaviour that could be seen as exclusive to teachers was found in other people who weren't teachers. Some students even exhibited similar behaviour patterns as well. To reflect this, we created the following persona to explain this finding. We called him the 'The Chaperone'

___

<div class="gallery">
  <iron-image class="galleryItem" style="background-color: white" sizing="contain" preload fade src="/src/content/thoughts_items/161003/gallery/chaperone.png"></iron-image>
</div>

*Henry is a teacher and a father. He loves to enrich his students, his children and his friends with new knowledge he discovers. He gets a great kick out of helping people to an epiphany or finding something that inspires.*

*He’s always on the look out for interesting places to explore whether it be through his fellow teachers, places he finds while Googling for things to do with his family or reading through his mailing list. He has a great knowledge of attractions around where he lives and will take visiting friends on a tour around his favourite places. Whenever he’s looking for someone to go with, he judges places based on whether they fit the people he’ll be taking based on what he thinks they’ll like. If it’s his kids, it has to be interactive in some way. If it’s his students, he’ll base his judgement off the school curriculum as well as how it engages children. If he finds something new he knows nothing about, he’ll visit it by himself first to judge it and see if it’s something that he wants to share or to absorb so that he can take it all in (something he definitely won’t be doing with his students or kids). It gives him prior knowledge so he can help guide who ever it is he brings back with him, which is especially invaluable for planning school field trips.*

*Either way, by himself, with his children or on a school trip he’s bound by some external time factor, be it the time left on the parking meter or the attention span of the kids he’s with. He loves taking people to exhibitions that let you interact with the things on display in different ways, not just reading or visual but experiential; ways that allow you to explore stories and facts from different points of view. He knows not everyone learns or thinks the same way (he’s a teacher after all).*

___

Presenting our findings this way was done to highlight the behaviours and show how a teacher doesn't just stop the way they act outside the classroom. He engages this way with everyone. It's not exclusive behaviour to teachers. It's parents finding something to do with their kids, it's locals showing off their hometown to their out-of-town friends. This was representative of what we found through our interviews and field studies. The proof gave us the confidence to say to our stake-holders that separating teachers and students would be disingenuous and potentially damaging. It's the kind of thinking that births content that tries to appeal to certain groups but shows a complete lack of understanding. It’s visible in the many cringe inducing marketing campaigns to millennials you'll find [on social media](https://www.reddit.com/r/HelloFellowKids).

To create the personas, we used the mental model we had created and our knowledge of the interviewees themselves. We took patterns from the mental model and merged them with certain people based on their shared practices into one persona. We did this until we had about 4 different personas. This was enough to define the different expected behavioural compositions in the general audience we interviewed. With each of these personas, we had captured the essence of what the mental model describes in a sharable, relatable format.

It also provided a great lens to examine design problems and solutions under. What would Henry think of this? How would Alissa find out about that? Would Anahera take to this? All of a sudden the names of the personas became common nomenclature in weekly meetings with the rest of the external teams. This sped up communication and provided an easy to use analytical tool to view our ideas from the perspective of those we had interviewed. It constantly reminds you of the people you are designing for. Explanations on why a particular design decision is important are no longer in rough terms. Direct reference to the behaviours of a persona, just by name, can justify a direction in confidence. It is all born from the data gathered from interviews and immersions in the experience of others. Behavioural personas make design more accurate, faster and cheaper. They are the GPS to the map that is the mental model of the target audience.

For such a useful tool, it is imperative that it is presented in a way that is portable, reference-able, easily understandable. Like an API but for specific human behaviour. So we created a booklet to be shared out among all involved parties containing all that we had discovered. It included direct quotes from interviewees that highlighted specific points of interest with regard to shared behaviours and beliefs. It had descriptions on the specific findings like the importance of a personal, relatable perspective in the presentation of the information. It provided multiple perspectives on the effects of sensitive material. The book became a compass for people to navigate the audience’s personal feelings and the variety of information needed to account for the multiple ways that people learn. We also provided a revised version of each of the behavioural personas in bullet point form dividing their primary characteristics into motivations (the why) and behaviours (the what, when and how). Each came with a quote taken from one of the interviewees to encapsulate the overall essence of the persona.

Without a shared, common language, working together becomes inefficient. Design is a language and the process a conversation. Imagine how much meaning would get confused if two people with different first languages tried to build a raft. They might be able to succeed but to do so would take an excessive amount of effort compared to people who spoke the same language. Behavioural personas are just one way to smooth over the design process to get everyone on the same page faster so that identifying and understanding problems is effective. Speaking in terms relating back to the audience makes sure that they are always in the back of the mind. Personas are the lens to look through to gain perspective on the problems that your audience faces. Design is nothing without empathy. Without proper tools, it can be easy to forget that design is not about the end product but those that will be the ones using it.
