[3NOW](http://www.3now.co.nz/) is the on-demand streaming service for TV3, the second largest Free-To-Air broadcaster in New Zealand.  It is part of MediaWorks, one of three major broadcasters in New Zealand providing television and radio channels along with digital journalism.  The initial on-demand service offered by TV3 had a very poor user experience and finding appropriate shows was hard. The project's aim was to undertake a complete overhaul of the visual language, create a better means of content navigation, work on new task-flows, and design appropriate modes of interaction.

The wider project involved mobile apps and a follow-up web design for browser-based content navigation and delivery. Work involved exploring and developing the visual styles and animations through many iterations of the supporting design artifacts. Central to the overall design process was translating client requests into features. For me that meant working on developing task-flows into wire-frames, visual directions and various UI element animations. Much of the work was delivered to the client and development team as interactive prototypes. These prototypes brought the task-flows to life and put the motion elements into context.

Navigating show content can become unwieldily so the focus on for the 3NOW user experience was to eliminate hierarchies and banish the hamburger-menu. When users can't find what they're looking for quickly they abandon the service. Making content navigation efficient and responsive became a design priority. The primary user interaction therefore centred around search. Making the search interface as intuitive as possible with minimal typing and minimal cognitive load. A lot of the work in making the content navigation invisible through a clean search interface involved crafting semantically rich and fast back-end indexing but the motivation for doing that was design driven. In terms of the final deliverable, the design works well. My grandmother finds it easy to use; using her iPad to select and stream content to her AppleTV. Praising the ease of use before realising I'd helped to design it. Enough said! That is a win as far as I'm concerned.

### Related Links

[3NOW on the App Store](https://itunes.apple.com/nz/app/3now/id713771599?mt=8)
